Great idea.
Yeah, that's a good idea
We are in your hands to kick off.
Mm-hmm.
If you want to make any comments in addition to those comments that were made this
morning.
Yes.
But we do have quite a few questions to ask, so-
Cool. Thank you
And if you look at with your forbearance, if we go that extra five minutes at the
end-
That's fine
... we'd certainly be appreciative. Sorry about that.
Not a problem, Mr. Chair. No, I won't...
You've met Peter and I again this morning, so don't need to introduce us.
But we do have members of the Kiwi Rail team here-
Cool. Yep
... today that we will introduce as they respond to your questions.
The Kiwi Rail board and team are determined to deliver an improved
railway as part of an integrated transport system.
We already provide safe, efficient, and sustainable rail freight and
passenger services that connect seamlessly with road and coastal shipping
networks. But we can do more, and we will continue to reduce costs and lift
earnings, volume, reliability, and safety.
At the heart of the strategy is a focus on providing safe and reliable services
with the right products and best customer service at the lowest sustainable cost.
Our safety performance remains a top priority, with a
reduction in total recordable injuries of 19% year on year,
a reduction in signal pass at danger or SPAD, we love acronyms,
events, and a continuous improvement focus on critical risk and
controls that is part of an embedded safety culture.
Our rail network works best when it runs at scale.
The decisions made in the budget will allow us to continue this work.
We're very appreciative of the large investments that have been made in the
rail in recent years, and very conscious of the need to achieve greater
value for money for taxpayers, and we are delivering on this.
As an example, Kiwi Rail has achieved a 52% reduction in
bridge replacement costs by moving to standardized repeatable designs.
Alongside that, we've begun casing piers of wooden bridges
in concrete to extend their life. In some cases, that's by
10 to 20 years. That helps ensure government infrastructure
investment is targeted at critical assets.
Since financial year '24, the operating ratio, which is
cost to revenue for the non-accountants in the room, for the combined rail freight
and property businesses has decreased from 80% to 74%.
That's been achieved through a focus on cost efficiency, labor
productivity, and asset utilization.
We're making sure our workforce is right-sized, and we have reduced our
overall headcount by 9.4% since the end of
financial year '24 to 4,441 as at
1 June. There will be further adjustments as our
work to deliver CRL comes to an end.
The up to one point 1.075 billion, the budget allocated to
the next three-year rail network investment program, or NRRNE,
another acronym for you, for National Railway Renewals and Maintenance, will
help us strengthen our relationships with our freight customers and
create a meaningful competitive advantage in the market.
The additional 106.9 million allocated for ongoing
renewals in the Auckland and Wellington Metro networks for work in
FY28 is significant, and it allows us to continue
addressing historic underinvestment.
Issues such as replacing rails, ballast, and sleepers,
slope remediation,
are key to improving service reliability, and it
will grow rail public transport and help relieve road
congestion in both cities. We're currently working on how the
funding will be split between Auckland and Wellington and engaging with both
public transport providers in both cities.
Finally, we want to emphasize that Kiwi Rail remains
focused on building a financially sustainable,
reliable, and efficient rail business that delivers value
to New Zealand. Thank you, Mr. Chair. We invite your questions.
Thanks. Okay. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you both for coming back this afternoon.
I want to ask questions about the inter-island ferries to start
with.
Is it Kiwi Rail's understanding that they will operate the new ferries, and that
will be in public ownership when the new ferries do arrive?
Do you want to take that?
Thanks for the question.
We've been operating the ferries for over 60 years.
The team are doing an incredible job.
Our desire is that we will continue to operate those.
That's obviously a shareholder decision, and we await that
Have you had any communication or otherwise to indicate a preferred
option moving forward?
Not directly to ourselves, and as I said, we await shareholder
decision, but we've made it very clear, and we're
operating with the intent, that we will be the operator.
And as we work with Ferry Holdings,
that's our intent.
In terms of the delivery timeline for the new ferries
and terminal upgrades, we heard a little bit about that this
morning. As an operator that has been involved in
the
interisland ferry services over many decades,
what do you see as the potential risks in terms of meeting the
timeframe that has been set for the delivery and operation of the new ferries?
At this stage, well, we've got our Ferry Holdings colleagues here.
Obviously, they're the project directors. They're accountable for it.
So maybe we'd invite Sandip or Chris to come to the front.
All right.
I think if you come up, stay up there with the mic-
Yep
... because I suspect there might be the odd few.
Yes.
That's kind of what I was suggesting.
There might be some others of your team who might want to come up from time to
time.
Okay.
Sure.
Thank you. Chris?
Yeah.
Sorry, can you repeat that?
Yeah. I was sort of leaning on the
decades of experience that Kiwi Rail have in operating
the ferry services and from their perspective,
what they might see as the key risks to meeting the timeframes
that have been set for the delivery and operation of the new ferries.
Well, the first thing is they're not being built in Britain, so there's no
chance of the vessels being late. The Chinese, as late as
three weeks ago when they were in Wellington,
indicated that the ferries
design and so forth is right up to time.
As the minister indicated this morning, the Chinese shipyard has
actually promised us that they can be delivered earlier.
We have to temper that with the infrastructure.
We don't want a Tasmanian situation where we get vessels here
and the wharves and so forth aren't complete.
So we are still maintaining a March 2030,
and then sometime subsequent to that for the second vessel.
There are no risks that we see as far as the ships are
concerned. As far as the infrastructure is concerned,
well, in New Zealand, infrastructure delivery is a toss-up.
Hopefully, we have got contractors on board and will have
contractors in the future that will deliver to our
timeline. So there isn't anything at the moment that stands
out as a reason to be concerned about delivery.
When you say there are no risks associated with
the ships as such-
Yes
... are you then saying that
Ferry Holdings has not turned its mind to any potential
risks that may arise, and what you might do to
mitigate that in the circumstance that those potential
risks arise?
Yes, we have, and I'll let Sandip talk to that.
But the board has
a spreadsheet sitting in front of it at each meeting and is
identifying the key points at where things are to be
delivered.
So at this point in time, we're well ahead of that.
As I said, the Chinese shipyard would like to produce them even
quicker. We don't want them quicker, but Sandip, do you want to
add something about the contract?
Yeah. So the production
will start in March, May next year for the ships.
May, yeah.
The selection process for the equipment that goes into the vessels is going
well, and the design is going well.
The partners that we have in Guangzhou who are
delivering the vessels for us are confident that they're ahead of schedule
right now and will remain so. Their business drivers are
essentially
around that, around producing more vessels early.
So that's how they gear their business up.
The risks to that process will be their supply chain.
We don't see any issues reported in there so far.
And then at the same time, Kiwi Rail and ourselves have to work
together tightly to make sure that the things we need to provide the
shipyard are provided on time. And they are things like design
approvals, and they are things like assurance activities and the
observations that we want to do to make sure the quality we get
is met.
And at this stage, yes, we have contingencies in place, but we're not
using them.
Okay. Thank you. Just one more question, which Duncan might
answer maybe. It's the question I ask all the time about
maintenance costs for the existing fleet that's being operated at the
moment. Obviously, that fleet has had to work a bit harder
for longer than anticipated.
Just stay there, Sandip, if you want, or we could put two chairs there.
Okay.
What information can you provide around the expectations for maintenance and any
associated costs for the existing fleet?
So
we continue to focus on maintenance, have a safe, reliable
service with great customer experience.
We've seen that our reliability improve on year on year and up to
98.7% this year to date.
Our focus continues to remain the same.
After the initial surge in 2023 as we changed our maintenance structure,
we've seen our maintenance costs level off.
Obviously, as I said previously, those are commercially in confidence,
but they continue to remain static.
And obviously, as Chair said, we continue to focus
on better efficiency with what we're doing on that maintenance, including
new centralized
procurement processes and other things to get the best value we can.
But maintenance and reliability is a key focus.
Can we just add to that, please, Mr. Chair?
Also, as we've told the committee before, we've also got
Global experts helping us doing peer reviews called DNV.
We've also recently done a lot of work on electrical componentry.
So obviously with older ships, sometimes when you're doing maintenance-
Mm-hmm
... it's what you can't see. So we've done a lot of work on our electrical
componentry. We are increasing the inventory of
spares for some safety-critical inventory items.
That's been presented through our risk committee, and we're taking action.
We've done a complete drill-down through key
safety-critical electrical componentry in the last three, four months.
Thank you.
Thank you. Carlos.
Hi. Let's not talk about CRL,
but just we focus on health and safety.
Do you think a split second can make a difference between life and death?
Sorry, could you repeat that?
Do you think a split second can make the difference
between life and death? And if so, how important is that
safety warnings are delivered as quickly and effective
as possible?
Sorry, I missed your first-
Do you think a second-
Split second
... oh, a split second-
I suggest you-
Hmm.
Dave Gordon's online. Dave is actively involved
from the CR committee. So
of course,
life and death root cause issues always come down to time.
So the answer would be yes. I've seen safety incidents where
split seconds can make a difference.
So what is the percentage of Aucklanders can understand te reo
Māori?
Can understand the words Māori-
That's more a question for Auckland Transport.
It's-
I think, Mr. Chair this is-
What is the percentage of Auckland that you think they can understand
fully on te reo Māori?
This is more a question for Auckland Transport with respect.
I think, could you get to the-
All right, I got to the point
You're beating around the bush a lot.
All right.
Yeah.
So when I was
visiting CRL,
I can see that the safety warning for people who cross the yellow line on the
platform are announced in Māori first before English.
Given the timing can be critical in safety situation, do you think that these
few seconds taken to deliver the warning in te reo
Māori can increase the risk of someone falling onto the track
before they hear the English warning? Why or why not?
Look, my response there would be, we are not the operator in Auckland.
Anything you've seen in CRL around signage or te reo Māori,
that is Auckland Transport. We can't answer that question.
And we don't-
So you don't believe there's operational issues?
Safety-
We're not the operator.
It's not their issue. It's not-
We're not the operator
... reading works.
So for example, on the track, in terms of the tunnel and the
infrastructure, we're the owner and the operator there.
But in terms of someone fell over
in a station,
Auckland Transport is the owner of that asset and that safety
risk on the platform that they could answer
that.
Okay.
So
I just believe that I think safety is important.
If someone fall down from the track, that actually affecting the operation
of the CRL as well, and I think we need to address that to make sure the
messages or healthy, the safety warning delivered to people.
Okay, I think you get your point-
It's a good question. We're happy to take that through and communicate that through
this-
To Auckland Transport-
It's not a key rail issue per se.
Correct.
Look, I just wanted to ask you follow-up questions that I asked
earlier when the minister was here around the
different railway lines that are being thought about.
And if you could walk through where we're at with Marsden.
But also the importance of
the Southdown to Avondale, which we've talked about, and the Fourth Main
line out of Auckland, and how we can work together
with Auckland Council in particular to protect those
opportunities and to realize those opportunities.
Sure.
Kiwirail is at a pivot point. So we've had significant investment
in large capital projects, large infrastructure.
You're now seeing Kiwirail getting back to running an efficient, productive
railway. So the investment we've just got through Arnott, for example,
is particularly around renewals and
upgrades. 65, 66% of every dollar is in
maintenance and upgrades. So,
you're not going to see large, big, new networks
going forward except for two or three that we'll talk about.
Firstly,
our key focus right now is to unlock capacity on
existing infrastructure. So for example, in the South Island, we've got the Midland
turnout, which is going to have an impact on our
train utilization
around Lyttelton Port. You've got the freight hubs in Mosgiel.
I spoke with that this morning.
We're obviously talking with some of our larger
customers around their manufacturing sites in terms of sidings and
connections into their plants. In North Island, obviously, Fourth Main
we can talk about. You've got some regional lines, particularly connecting
some of our frontier key customers.
So a lot of it,
first tip is unlocking capacity through specific investments,
but these aren't
five, 600 million into dollar investments.
The second thing is the portfolio you talked about.
So the Marsden Line, you'll be aware of publicly
what's happening there. We had
an RFI, RFP. We've run a full due virtual process there.
There's three players now that are doing a design sprint over a
period of six to eight weeks, and that will come back, and that's really to
optimize the initial cost that we had for that line. That's the first thing.
The second one is
Avondale to Southdown. These are long-term
opportunities with lots of options.
But the Avondale to Southdown corridor
is critical if North Port gets its tonnage ...
container tonnage up to, say, 400,000 TU per annum.
That's going to need
volume coming out of North Port into
a hub in West Auckland and the
Avondale Southdown, which avoids the Britomart.
Avondale Southdown is also a big metro unlock for urban
development in the Mount Roskill area.
Significant
opportunity for
Auckland Council, significant opportunity for
the city. So
lots of people have been out to have a look at that.
We've got designation expires May 29.
We're obviously in discussions now about how we
move that designation on. There's options there.
So that's an option for the future, and there'll be lots of
different machinations in terms of different funding partners
or whether the shareholder wants to look at that. So, that's one.
Fourth Main we've talked about, Northland we've talked about-
Golden Triangle
... and then there's the Golden Triangle, which one option is electrification from
Pukekohe through to Hamilton.
We've already electrified through to Pukekohe.
If we electrified through to Hamilton, a large portion of our freight's in the
Golden Triangle. So that's one long-term option.
One, from an emissions perspective, it's positive.
And secondly, from a
new asset and maintenance perspective, it has some advantages.
So that's
going through early design business case stage now.
So, I've got two subs in a moment. But just so how do we get the
situation where... So Auckland's plans keep on
changing in terms of, because the government wants them to change, in terms
of housing. But how do we encourage housing
growth in the areas which will help fund infrastructure,
i.e. in that part of Auckland as opposed to other parts of Auckland as the
priority? So-
Yep
... I acknowledge that they want different choices, et cetera.
But if you can try and encourage-
Sure
... more development there, you capture some of that value uplift.
And I know that the Crown
owns quite a lot of land in that area as well.
I think-
I'm not sure if Kiwi Rail owns.
We do.
Well, the fair bit in the corridor I would imagine.
We do, our seed does.
So yeah, so there's potential to be gaining some value out of that.
How do we encourage that to be seen as a relative priority?
And the other bit is, could you just spell out a little bit more about
what it means for having that extra line would
mean for the operation of the Auckland Metro network
as well in terms of its capabilities?
Okay, I'll answer your first question, Mr. Chair. Peter will take your second.
So to answer your first question, that starts with Auckland
Council officials. So the chief executive and his executive team engaging
with Peter and his executive team
to look at the potential, but also look
at respective parties' plans, priorities, and see where we can actually align
those to achieve the outcome that's required.
As I mentioned this morning, there is an incentive there in the form...
And you've touched on it too, Mr. Chair.
The Crown, there's a lot of Crown land around that Avondale to Southdown
corridor that is currently non-rateable for Auckland Council.
That is a significant incentive to them to actually work with, for us
to work together to do that. We have, as I indicated in
our meeting this morning with the minister here this morning, is that we have
already met with Auckland Council and had some preliminary discussions.
We now have, at a political level, agreement between Minister Peters and Mayor
Brown that the officials should engage and start exactly your
point. And I'll ask Peter to answer your second question with
respect to the capacity on that line.
Is David Gordon available? David online?
Yes.
I have his cell phone.
We got him.
Take all his-
Yes.
You'll ask.
Oh, hi, Ian.
David.
Yeah, I'm sorry. I'm online. I was just waiting to be called in. Yeah.
Great.
Thank you.
You have a... Did you hear that question, David? You're able to answer?
Yes, I did.
Thank you.
So
the cool thing about Southdown Avondale is is for a long time it's been pitched as
being a freight route, which it can be.
But the primary beneficiary of this is actually the urban transport
in Auckland and as you've mentioned, Chair, the urban development possibilities
that goes around that.
At the moment,
we're moving from having a rail system that just goes to a terminus called
Wairapara into a loop. You've got a loop around the
coast, and what Southdown Avondale does is
creates an east west corridor across
the isthmus, and it is the only remaining
corridor that can be occupied. The importance of
that is one is you get much more point-to-point traffic.
So if you live out west, you don't have to go into the center to go to the airport
or anything of that nature.
It provides resilience in terms of breakdown or maintenance work,
and public transport works best when it's in loops.
And the third loop is a major unlock of
capacity, and the equivalent unlock,
say, in trying to build more tracks through a new market would be
absolutely prohibitive.
So it's
got the three benefits. It's got freight, it's got public transport,
and the major urban development opportunity that flows from it.
Thank you for that, Dave. Thank you, Peter.
Thanks, David.
Dan? Right. Go ahead.
Thank you for highlighting the importance of Avondale Southdown
corridor. Like as the MP for Mount Roskill, I have been advocating for
it. But one thing I've been trying to do, I think we have a curious discussion on
this, do you think the current legisl- legislation allow KiwiBuild or
Kiwi Rail to develop residential housing above
and directly integrated with the railway station?
Yeah.
Transport corridors, urban development. David, do you want to pick that up?
Yes.
Well,
the core to Southdown Avondale is having that integrated development,
and particularly in the station areas where you would want- To have
private investments
in housing, et cetera, and above the corridor if possible.
I think the issue with building above a corridor generally, you have to do it
before it's in place, because once it's done, it is prohibitively expensive.
And then it comes down to the land price.
Because effectively, if you're building above a corridor, your foundations are in
the air, which is a lot more expensive than having your foundations in the ground.
But the opportunities,
Chair, do exist for that development.
And whether Kiwi Rail is the agency to do that's another matter.
But it is
most importantly, the land is there to do
it if we have the council, et cetera, online with us.
Can I maybe add to David's answer to your question?
The other part of this is the land is owned by
NZRC and leased to Kiwi Rail. If you
recall from our examination in November last year, we talked
about the extension to the core lease of NZRC for a further
99 years. That is still in progress and hopefully nearing
completion. That is another factor, is to give that surety.
If you're looking at an urban corridor development, and David is quite
right when saying about it needs to be done at the outset,
is that you want to also be able to give some surety to your
development partners, whether it be Auckland Council or developers, that
there is tenure there. So that core lease is an important component as
well in answering your question, Mr. Chair.
I think this is why I'm asking. Do you think we should change the legislation
to unlock the scope of Kiwi Rail so you guys can actually build the
housing on top of the station rather than do the partnership?
I don't think that is... Kiwi Rail is not a builder.
That's not our expertise. I think the key piece lies with
working closely with Auckland Council to be able to develop that corridor.
We have 95% of the land in the corridor.
And whatever vehicle that takes, the Chair's right, it's
not our expertise. But we do have
some large parts of the jigsaw to be able to work with other
people.
Thank you.
Gillian.
Sup?
I didn't... Oh, did I have a sup on this?
Well, you did ask for one.
No.
It's gone, let's go.
I think I had a sup on Avondale Southdown.
Oh, that's, yeah, that's all part of the same-
We're still on that.
Yeah, go. Avondale Southdown is very much part of this conversation, so away you
go.
No, I had a sup on electrification of the Golden Mile.
Golden Triangle.
The Golden Triangle.
Not Golden Mile, sorry. That was in the news today.
That'll do. Keep going.
That won't be electrified or golden.
But on the electrification, I just wanted to know,
you mentioned that you're at a business case
stage on that. What's the earliest you
could move forward with that electrification, completing the electrification
to Hamilton,
if there was government support for it?
And would it require additional Crown funding-
Yeah
... from what you've been allocated?
David, you take this. You take this and then there might be a follow-up from that.
Well, if I take a just a drop, the dollars arrived
tomorrow just
for the sake of discussion. We have a
low-level concept design of it. So there is
modeling to be done on three things.
The first is on the most optimum way to draw power from the national
grid. So that's the upstream supply and the security of that-
Yes
... that having been designed and work with Transpower.
The second is the actual configuration of the
network. That is
a relatively more straightforward job in terms of you know where the power's coming
in, et cetera, you can do that. The third thing which takes time as
well is the selection of locomotive.
And
if you look at the options that are available now with modern technology,
you can have something that's pure electrified, you can have something that could
potentially run all the way south through Wellington if you
have a traction motor that can do the 25
kV and 1,500 DC power. Or you look at
a hybrid situation where the locomotive runs maybe
the last, the phrase is last mile, but it's a lot longer than the last
mile, operating on battery. The challenge with all of that
is we have a relatively narrow gauge, and that's a lot of technology to fit into a
loco. So that's the long way of saying I think it would be two to
three years
before we were turning dirt,
other than sort of preliminary works.
And are there any electric locomotives currently being used
for freight on the North Island main trunk?
Yes.
They still are in operation?
Yes, we have 15 EF locomotives in operation.
Okay, great.
But it sounds like you would have to look at purchasing new
ones for running the freight trains
between Auckland and Tauranga.
That's correct. 15 would not be enough.
No.
15 wouldn't be enough.
And the
time, and you would need basically a commitment of
government funding to be able to purchase those locomotives,
as well as completing the electrification on parts of the Golden
Triangle. So we're talking about many years away from
seeing this to realization.
Comment?
I'm not sure many, David talked about two, three years for the modeling.
We've already
been talking with various parties on
fleet, because it is a fleet plus a network
infrastructure upgrade as well. So as it comes together-
Yeah
... we've got to think about both.
Yeah.
So I think as we come to the table, it'll be a
proposition for both that upgrade of infrastructure and the fleet.
And look, there's a selection of players that we
can talk to on the fleet side.
And-
In terms of passenger trains, I suppose if
electrification was completed on the Golden Triangle, there'd
be the potential for electric locomotives
pulling passenger trains between Hamilton, Auckland-
And that's-
... and Tauranga
Well, and that's great. Well,
so that's Waikato Regional Council.
Yeah
Obviously, their ownership of that.
But if it's electrified,
and the
decision was to do that, then you've got a network that can do that.
That's capable.
Yep.
Okay. Look, I've just got one other one on new lines or use
of existing lines. It's the line I've been asked by some of the Wairarapa mayors,
actually, about the line between
Masterton and
Hawke's Bay, and whether that can be activated to take forestry that way as
opposed to taking it to just forestry freight, probably.
If you even get passengers, it'd be great.
But-
Okay
... that way rather than just-
If it's an infrastructure question, David, do you want to handle that or Stephen?
Look, I'm happy to handle it because we did have a look at it as a team freight
line.
Yep.
There is a lot of work to bring that line back to being
fully operable.
The rail is lightweight.
A number of the bridges are not suited
for
regular rail passage. The answer is yes, it could be done,
but the expense of doing that relative to railing,
if it was going to Hawke's Bay, it would be even be cheaper to rail it into
Wellington and rail it all the way to Hawke's Bay than the cost it would take to
reinstate that line
fully.
Okay. No, that's fine. That helps.
I'm giving Simon a question.
Oh, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Am I, are we going to forgive him enough or not?
No, I'm not sure about that.
We're not sure about that. We'll give you one.
Well, Mr. Chair, it's actually an important matter that you would be interested in,
I think.
Is that-
Why don't you give me one and we'll see where we go?
I'm interested in Kiwi Rail South Island and West Coast
Rail corridor assets-
Yes
... particularly the lines that support coal, dairy, minerals,
forestry, and export via major ports.
Quite a few major freight customers have made their concerns clear
that outages directly affect export volumes, their road freight
costs and regional productivity.
I understand there were some line blockages 2024,
and potentially more recently.
So I'm interested in hearing from the chair and the chief executive because while
there are technical matters, no doubt,
are you satisfied that Kiwi Rail's assets on these
corridors are being maintained and renewed to the standard required by those
customers? And are you satisfied that sufficient
investment is going into those corridors to secure that
part of the economy?
Would you like to take each corridor or-
Separately
Should we go through each one separately?
Look-
If that's-
That might be helpful to the committee.
Yeah. Okay.
Okay.
So the first one was the coal route?
Yes.
Okay. So,
if you have a look at the investment
on that
part of the network, 10 years ago, we used to regularly get
cyclones, floods. That network was out all the time.
If you have a think about, we have strengthened up the tunnel
over there, the Tawhai Tunnel last year.
So we aren't getting service failures on that network.
In fact, the
investment that's been going on in that part of the network in the South Island is
very strong. So the South Island network for coal
route, I think has been, certainly in our plan, it's a prioritized
route.
And the other one, sorry.
To Port of Lyttelton.
Yes.
And
Fonterra and Westland Milk's concerns.
Yeah, sure. So, and
I can get Adele to talk about the customer side.
So certainly we have been in deep discussion with Fonterra around
their particular
networks, particularly around Waitoa, et cetera,
North Island. We've been talking to them certainly in the South Island.
We are investing in the network through to Lyttelton.
The Midland turnout we talked about before will be really important for us.
So those customers you talk about,
they are the growth networks and when we think about our investment for capital,
they are prioritized, particularly around speed restrictions to start with and
secondly about any capital upgrade
we need. So when we look at our network, the growth
part of the world, they are right there in terms of the prioritization of
capital.
And if, sorry, before
Adele does talk about the customer's perspective, if I could just add to your
question, Simon.
Both Peter and I spend quite a bit of time directly with those
customers, with Lyttelton Port, with Fonterra, et cetera, and others
to actually make sure that we are hearing any of their concerns, we're acting on
those concerns, and we are working together to resolve them.
Okay.
Potentially before we might want to hear more about the customers,
given the huge potential to develop
mineral resources on the West Coast, dripping mineral sands, critical minerals,
the lack of reasonably foreseeable processing capacity on the West
Coast, it may be possible, but it may be challenging.
Does Kiwi Rail have the capacity to upgrade and increase the volume
of freight,
particularly like heavy ores that might need to be carried across the island?
On that line, definitely, and I can get Adele to talk about the customer side.
But definitely on that line,
there is capacity, and then it comes down to
any negotiation with the customers on rolling stock, et cetera, but it's not a
capacity issue.
Okay.
Adele?
Yeah, and the
key to that is the new locomotives with their greater tractive
power,
and that gives us the ability to haul greater tonnage.
And those trials
that Duncan and the team are leading,
those will be overtaken I think in the next
six months, Duncan?
Yeah.
The implementation continues right now.
That's right
Continuing from-
That's right. So that's the other key piece, is the fantastic
new rolling stock that is coming into the South Island with those 57
locomotives coming on. That will make a significant difference to our
ability, our haulage capacity out of the West Coast.
And if you look at the total investment, if you look at Arnott and you look at all
the fleet, a good sort of 50, 60%
is focused around the South Island.
Okay. That's really comforting and I'm sure those seeking to invest in
mineral development will be really interested. Thanks.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
My next set of questions are around the retirement of the Aratere,
and in particular, the resilience considerations.
So initially, Kiwi Rail refused to release some
information that required the ombudsman to
get involved. What was the extent of any ministerial
involvement in that decision?
I'll start answering your question and then invite Duncan or Peter to
respond. So for clarity,
we did not refuse to release information.
We could not release information at the time of the initial request that was
commercially sensitive to the negotiations.
We subsequently did release that information when it
was no longer commercially sensitive.
That happened to be at around the same time as the
Herald
lodged their, and had their hearing back from the ombudsman.
What I can also state to you is there was no ministerial intervention.
Now, Duncan, would you like to add to that?
I don't think I have anything to add to that.
To what extent did the $7 million net financial
benefit
to Kiwi Rail as a result of not sending the Aratere to dry
dock influence the decision that was made?
You respond to that?
No. That decision
was never about
recovering or optimizing funds. It was all about
the timing of
the infrastructure.
We had to let the program get moving.
We made the decision to move
quickly to allow ferry holdings to actually enable the
infrastructure to start, and it wasn't about
we could save money at that stage.
So that wasn't a prime decision, but it was about program and
getting ahead of program.
Okay. So as a result of the retirement, the fleet was
reduced to two vessels.
What is the extent of the contingency as a
result of that to ensure freight is still able to move adequately, passengers
are still able to be carried across the strait, and particularly, I guess, in light
of
one particular issue that saw just one vessel sort of sailing the strait
for a period?
Duncan?
So no problem. I'll talk on maintenance perspective, and then I'll talk
to the customer perspective. So the best thing is similar
to the previous question, the best thing we can do is strong preemptive
maintenance, which we're focused on,
and then we have put together our deep maintenance.
We've blocked that together at a customer's request.
So you'll see one ship coming out to do a wet dock here in Wellington
Harbor, and then Kaitaki going to
Singapore for a dry dock.
We're very focused on having to do those regulatory required
dry docks and do them well, and that's when we get into the deep maintenance that
will ensure including replacing some obsolete
equipment so that they can sail reliably and safely through to the end of
their life. We'll continue to do that going forward, and we've
messaged that through to our customers.
Yeah. And from an operational perspective,
this was always going to be a year of learning for us, and we
have been taking a continuous improvement approach.
And I think the key learning that we had, if you look at the utilization of the
ferries post the move to four vessels actually operating
the strait.
The only time that we've
both reached anywhere near above 95% is through the Christmas
peak. And what we learnt this year was that
we hadn't left enough space, and I think about this as safety
lane meters, in the event that we go into
disruption, to be able to catch up in a timely manner, and we
think about that as seven days of being able to actually catch up the
freight tasks. So what we've done for FY27 going forward,
is Duncan and ourselves have worked to
cap the total lane meters that actually can be booked.
So we're leaving some space, and taking that risk management
approach,
in the event that we get into disruption so we can catch up faster, and that's what
the market's concerned about, is that we can actually catch up the freight
task in a reasonable amount of time.
So we've made that change, and the other thing that we've been optimizing all
throughout the year is our capacity management, which used to be relatively
static. We now do that on a very dynamic basis.
So meeting every fortnight and actively working our
capacity and releasing capacity across the modes.
That's rail, sea, and passenger, and that has gone extremely well
this year, and it's meant that we could release 6% more
passenger capacity than we thought we would be able to at the start of the
year. So it's just continuing to hone
all of these management practices to make sure we're absolutely
optimizing space on those ferries.
And you're
comfortable or confident that there's still a wee way to go until
2029?
Yes.
Is there any contingency planning for the future in the event that new ferries do
not arrive in 2029?
Not for the new ferries not arriving, but we do have, as all
parts of our business, we have business continuity plans that are ongoing.
And for the ferries, that would be for a significant, significant outage,
and we're engaging with the opportunity if it is a
significant major outage to put alternative arrangements.
Which we did discuss with the minister present this morning on the coastal
offering, coastal shipping.
Good. Thank you.
I'm just going to take this up on that one, and that is just my
understanding is that had the Araturi been kept,
that they would've changed the entire way in which Port of Marlborough in
particular would've had to respond, in terms of design and
operation. And literally every single sailing that was a K
boat versus
the Araturi, the wharf docking arrangements would've had to
been rearranged. And the cost of that was
definitely north of 100 million. It might've been north of 200 million, but it was
a lot of money. Is that correct?
That is correct.
You're referring to the previous project?
The previous project.
Previous project.
Yes.
Yes. It was very expensive.
Yeah.
Yes. So, yeah, we could've built a ship for that.
Okay, cool. Right, next. Tracy.
Thank you. Just going back a little bit in relation to, you
mentioned the metro renewals, that 106.9 million,
which was afforded via a reprioritization,
107 million reprioritization from the RNIT
24-27,
because it was no longer required.
Follow your question.
Was that money, had it been committed to any specific
projects?
No, sir.
And I ask mainly because
of my next question-
This was 170 million funding from the tech contingency from-
Funding
... Arnold too, yeah.
Yes
It was not needed
due to efficiency gains and,
no, the answer to your question was, was that required for any other project?
So it wasn't
that it had already been prioritized to other projects-
No.
No
... that had decided that they were no longer necessary.
Correct.
It was just an efficiency.
Yeah.
Because
obviously the rail freight funding
CAL and TAD contingency will be pending the RNIT
27-
Yes
... 2030.
Yes.
And the metro operating model review.
So firstly, do we know,
is that review looking at anything in particular that-
So this-
... might interest us, and when will that report?
So this is the IRON review, the metro rail operating model review.
Yes.
That's obviously been led through Ministry of Transport.
We don't have any update as to the timing.
They have asked us for some data, and we are providing some data
going over 10 years. But at this stage, we don't have any indication of
a timeline of a report or any action.
Okay. So if that's pending, that rail freight funding that's in
TAD contingency, that doesn't somehow become in
any sort of jeopardy of being released if it's pending those
reviews on timelines?
No. The RNIT fund is obviously separate from the metro
allocation. So as you know,
it goes through to May 27, in which case, we
put our application in there. So it's
separate from any metro of the 106 million that it got announced. It's separate.
But the rail freight funding and TAD contingency isn't
vulnerable to those-
No
... those timelines.
It's not.
No, it's separate.
I wanted to ask a question about the relationship with customers.
I'm delighted to hear about the engagement you're having with the likes of Fonterra
and Port of Lyttelton and so on. But, a question for
one of you
about just the way in which you're building customer relationships, which improving
that because there's been criticism over the years, but then there's also been
praise over it, particularly more recently. How that's going, what you're doing.
Also, minister said this morning that
rail freight is up 7% year on year versus road
up 2%, which is obviously great success.
I'll start.
So interested in just some comments you could make about what you're doing to
improve customer relationships and people saying, "Actually, I like the look of
Kiwi Rail. I'll use it more."
I will start with your question, Mr.
Chair, and then invite Peter and Adele to add to it.
So it starts with, again, if I take you back to when
we were before you in November last year, where we talked about moving from
transactional type relationships to strategic partnerships.
So that means engaging at board level and
chief executive level with our counterparts and with our customers
at that level is to understand their strategic objectives, their
priorities, their pressures, their risks, and make those as ours.
It's a little like my answer to your question about how we work with Auckland
Council. So it's got to start there.
And that is quite significant. A number of customers that I have been
to see with either Peter or Adele have said that
they had not had that engagement with the chair of Kiwi Rail before.
That then takes Peter with his team in terms of the
day-to-day work. So I'll pass over to you and perhaps Adele to
talk about some of the things that, how you're actually doing that, but it really
does have to start with that piece that you've got to understand each
other's strategic objectives, priorities, and also
frankly, the timeline that you're trying to achieve things in.
Sure. It's a good question. Thank you.
And I'll pass on to Adele shortly to take us through it a
bit. But if you think about where Kiwi Rail's at, we're year two
into a five-year
reset of our strategy. It's all about stabilizing the business, firstly,
resetting the business and growing the business.
And certainly this year, we are seeing significant markers,
not only on efficiency improvement but also growth,
net promoter scores. So I'll ask Adele to go through it, but it has very much
started on an operational,
service reliability based platform to support the investment the shareholders have
put in.
But Adele, over to you.
Yeah. It's an all-in effort, and I can't
emphasize that enough. It's the cross-functional outcome.
It's the culmination of investment
Um, that has been made in the network, and Siva and
the team doing a great job with that and really focusing on the things that matter
most to customers.
Through our operational teams delivering reliability, which we know is absolutely
at the top of the tree in terms of what matters.
Our customer service, in terms of how easy KiwiRail is to do business with
and the work program that we've got across the business on that front.
And that touches every area, so that's how easy is it to engage
about property, how easy is it to engage about a site and infrastructure,
as well as just using rail freight.
So our program does go right down the customer journey,
and that's really important the way that we're thinking about that in a
cross-functional way across the business.
And it's
thorough in terms of all of the aspects.
So it's culture within the organization, and I think that's been one of the
things we've all worked on hardest, and you'll see it at the center of our strategy
is building customer loyalty. And what we talk about internally
is our customer's success is our success.
We have to think first for them
and ourselves second. And everybody in the organization
is really embracing that, and I think that what people are seeing and feeling is
the result of that. So that's huge.
Its capability, we have listened and reset our
frontline teams, so there's been a wholesale restructure.
We've invested in capability on customer experience,
and are introducing the voice of the customer into everything we
do. And I'll give you a concrete example.
So we're resetting our billing process.
So the billing system at KiwiRail has not had investment for many,
many years, and it is manual.
And so the way we've started that project and the way we work today
is we've started with the voice of customers.
So we literally go out and talk to customers about billing, video that,
take that direct feedback, and we're basing the design of the new system
around that, around exactly what our customers are asking.
And so we're building that internal capability
to design from a customer-first basis,
and that's going very well across the board and really being embraced.
Siva's team's using that same design methodology for
private sightings and the work we're doing to improve how easy we are to do
business in that space.
So I think that's huge. Culture, capability,
and then
those investment outcomes, it's just hard outcomes.
We have lifted delivery in full and on time from
the mid-60s through to higher 80s, and we're still
absolutely committed to our target this year of achieving 95%.
So I think that's what it is. We've just surveyed again.
We're waiting on the qualitative, our customer NPS, which is our ultimate
measure of this. And we have, I can confirm, we're still
waiting on the call results, but we have taken another positive step forward.
So,
that's 50 basis point turnaround in that customer NPS
since we started our turnaround in 2024.
Thanks, Adele. That's a good summary.
I think just to round that out, Mr. Chair, part of this also, and you asked
about this this morning, is this is about understanding also
KiwiRail's role as part of an integrated transport system.
And this is about the interaction between road, rail, ports, airports, et cetera,
the movement of freight
and connecting all of these things up.
Yeah, okay. I've got Carlos and then Tangi.
Yes. Let's just talk about every dollar of rail infrastructure
investment, 66 cents actually go towards maintenance and renewal.
It's slightly higher than the 60 cents benchmark recommended by the
Infrastructure Commission. How can you go to target these issues?
Siva?
The benchmark that's given by the Infrastructure Commission, that's the minimum
benchmark.
Mm.
So if you go higher than then, it's better.
Okay.
So that means we're actually doing better than the benchmark by investing
66 cents per
every dollar. So at the moment, we're tracking towards a 75 cents.
75.
So that means we're actually investing more on our maintenance and
renewals than what's benchmarked.
So what is your ideal proportion of maintenance renewal
and building new rail for investment?
Maintenance renewals is the renewals part is actually the capital work we're
doing in renewing the rail. So it is like building the new
rail. So then there's bridges that come into it as well, so that's putting new
bridges on.
So your ideal is around 75 cents per dollar, is it?
It's between 65% and 75-
... is where we would want to be, and that is better than the
benchmark that's given by the Infrastructure Commission.
I think you've got to bear in mind that it depends on the maturity of any given
network as well.
It does, yeah.
Sorry.
Correct.
My question is more like, in the future, are we expect to see more the cost will be
increasing or what are your-
What you will see from that is that you will get longer life out of your
assets, and your assets will be more reliable, they'll be more resilient.
Mm-hmm.
So I must also say, for the interest of transparency, I am the deputy chair of the
Infrastructure Commission.
So she couldn't possibly disagree
with herself.
Tangi.
In terms of, sorry, in terms of cost that the chair touched on this earlier, by
standardizing the designs, we've taken our cost of bridges, for example, from
$300,000 a linear meter to $150,000 a linear meter.
So an example of a bridge that would've been $20 million to deliver, we're
delivering it at half the price now, $10 million, and that's construction, design
and construction cost.
Provide some advice to NZTA.
I'm sure they're doing it too, but Tangi.
Yes. Thank you, Chair. The lower North Island
sort of project, I'd ask about capital connection, I'm not asking about the
service, but obviously the increased provision of service
for the Manawatu and Wairarapa lines is,
as I understand, it's still on track to be delivered.
But from your perspective, in terms of some of the key infrastructure that's in
place and some of the changes that will need to happen
Do you foresee any delays in any of that work at
this stage?
Dave Sevier, you're driving that.
David, that flows on from the stuff we're doing in Wairapu.
Would you like to answer that?
Yeah.
The answer is no, I don't. The signaling for the
line we intend to go live immediately post this Christmas,
so that will change from a non-signaled area to signaled.
We've got two loops to build on the North Island Main Trunk, which
have to be done. We've got level crossing works and
various other siding works.
I don't see, at this stage, any issues which say we won't be
ready for when the trains are wanting to run and enter a service.
There will be an overlap between them arriving for testing and us being fully
ready, but not for service.
Okay. Thank you.
Thank you. And I've got one other question. I'm looking for other questions.
Can you just talk us through the impact of fuel, both positive and negative
over the last little while? And I know that when I've met with some of your folks,
it was like all diesel price has gone through the roof and it's diesel's the
challenge, so-
Sure
... what's the impact been of fuel price?
Sure. Look, I'll tell you. Obviously, we've been
very deep in the
advisory meetings with MB and MOT.
Just at a high level
from our model, fuel is 14% of our cost,
and that's in line with other-
Normally or now?
No, normally.
Normally.
Yeah, and that's in line with when we benchmark ourselves against other
rail companies. So obviously in the last three, four months,
it hasn't been a
supply issue, it's been a price issue.
Now we have the ability as other transport operators through a fuel adjustment
factor to move those prices through, and all the
transport operators are doing that.
We initially
stayed on a monthly, it's called FAF, Monthly Fuel Adjustment
Factor, which meant we took a bit of pressure in the first
late March,
early April period. We've now moved to a fortnightly
adjustment, which most of the market's at now.
And we've made sure that our fuel adjustment factor is in line with the
road market now. And in the last four, five weeks, it's settled
around that. And obviously as the diesel price is coming down,
then obviously the FAF will
be on a downward trajectory. But it is volatile and we
look at it daily,
as our competitors are.
But it's a significant cost to the business.
Yes. Yes, it is. Yes.
Very much.
In the order of magnitude of?
So for example, if you look at Interislander and rail freight in the last year
on a monthly basis, the increased costs circa six to
$6.5 million.
Over the last
what? Five, six months.
Per month, yeah.
Sorry?
Per month.
Oh, per month.
Yes.
$5 or $6 million per month.
Correct.
Yeah.
Yeah. So when we heard 160 million on track to be 160
million if it wasn't for that, it will be on track to be in the mid 180s
wouldn't it,
presumably?
Well, yeah.
It's 5 or 6 million a month.
Well,
remembering that the fuel obviously we look to pass on that-
To the client
... to the client.
Oh yeah. Okay.
Yeah.
So there's a pass through mechanism there.
And you have passed all that through to the client?
We have recovered the cost of that fuel.
Okay. Right.
And freight.
And freight. You can't. Passengers you can.
Passengers is a bit different.
Yeah.
And our passengers on the Interislander or
passengers that might have booked on the Grand Journeys they might have booked a
year ago. So we can't move those prices.
I don't want to give any comment too much on
our SCI for FY27 because obviously we haven't submitted the final
yet.
Yeah.
But
what I will say to you is what we are going to push well north of 160-
Yeah
... in FY27.
Very good. Any final questions colleagues?
Mr. Chair, may I just come back to one-
Absolutely
... that was asked earlier, and this was to Carlos.
I think just for the avoidance of doubt, if I may, and for the
record, safety is paramount to Kiwi Rail. You've heard us talk about that.
And as we said, we are not the operator of CRL.
Auckland Transport is. However,
we're working on the safety case at the moment with NZTA,
with Auckland Transport, Auckland One Rail and CRL Limited.
That's why David's on screen today, not here. That's what he's doing today.
So that
is required to make sure to be approved and signed off to make sure
CRL is safe to operate before it is opened.
That's pretty good.
Thank you.
Look, thank you very much and thanks for coming twice all of you.
Really appreciate it. Thanks. There's lots of great answers.
There may well be some follow-up questions-
That's fine
... which we usually do, but we really appreciate it and keep up the great work.
If you have any questions.
Thank you.
Thank you